The Story Of How Trump Officials Tried To End H-1B Visas
By Stuart Anderson Senior ContributorStuart Anderson writes about immigration, business and globalization.
Feb 01, 2021, 12:56am EST

Members of the Trump administration waged war behind the scenes against companies and foreign-born scientists and engineers. After four years, telling the story helps explain how Trump appointees turned U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) into an organization opposed to the immigration of high-skilled foreign nationals on H-1B visas.

The story began before Donald Trump’s election. A handful of senators in both parties became outspoken critics of H-1B visas. Sen. Charles Grassley (R-IA) regularly introduced a bill with Sen. Richard Durbin (D-IL) to impose sweeping restrictions on the employment of individuals on H-1B temporary visas. Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL) took the battle further, often publicly chastising major technology companies.

Two bills provided a blueprint for the types of changes to high-skilled immigration Trump officials sought to implement during their time in the executive branch. Sen. Sessions sponsored S. 2394, the American Jobs First Act of 2015, with Ted Cruz (R-TX). In 2013, Cruz sponsored a pro-immigration amendment in the Senate Judiciary Committee to increase the annual number of H-1B visas by 500%. In late 2015, Cruz turned around and supported an anti-H-1B visa bill, attempting to position himself for the anti-immigrant vote in the 2016 Republican presidential primary and a possible endorsement from Jeff Sessions.

The bill contained the outline of the Trump administration’s action plan for H-1B visas. An analysis determined its purpose was to end the ability of high-skilled foreign nationals to work in the United States.

Research has concluded high-skilled foreign nationals on H-1B temporary visas contribute to America in many ways, including by increasing productivity, which is essential to improving the standard of living. “When we aggregate at the national level, inflows of foreign STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] workers explain between 30% and 50% of the aggregate productivity growth that took place in the United States between 1990 and 2010,” according to economists Giovanni Peri (UC, Davis), Kevin Shih (RPI) and Chad Sparber (Colgate University). Research by economist Britta Glennon found rather than saving jobs, H-1B restrictions “have the unintended consequence of encouraging firms to offshore jobs abroad.”

H-1B visas are important because they generally represent the only practical way for high-skilled foreign nationals, including international students, to work long-term in the United States and have the chance to become employment-based immigrants and U.S. citizens. In short, without H-1B visas nearly everyone from the founders of billion-dollar companies to the people responsible for the vaccines and medical care saving American lives would never have been in the United States.

Despite the economic consensus that international students and high-skilled immigrants are a boon to America, the Trump administration took the opposite stance and tried, among other things, to break the link between international students and their ability to work in the U.S. after graduation. In addition to restricting H-1B visas, administration officials pursued policies to make it less appealing to study in the United States.

The Cruz-Sessions bill would have required anyone with a bachelor’s or master’s degree – 90% of current H-1B visa holders – from working in America in H-1B status until they had first worked for 10 years outside of the United States. The bill eliminated Optional Practical Training (OPT) for international students, which allows students to work in the United States, usually after graduating. (A never-released Trump administration regulation would have eliminated or restricted OPT.) The bill would set a high minimum salary ($110,000 a year) for H-1B visa holders, foreshadowing the administration’s October 2020 Department of Labor (DOL) wage rule. The bill also sought to make it easier for U.S. workers to file lawsuits against companies for discrimination, years before the Trump administration filed what the Wall Street Journal called a “dubious” lawsuit against Facebook for allegedly discriminating against U.S. workers.

The Cruz-Sessions bill reflected the views and likely drafting of Stephen Miller, a Sessions aide who went on to lead Donald Trump’s immigration policy.

The Durbin-Grassley bill, S. 2266, also contained elements of Trump’s future policies. During the Trump administration, some U.S. companies complained that 80% to 90% of their L-1 visa applications to transfer employees into the U.S. from India were denied. The Durbin-Grassley bill had a whole section that, in effect, restricted the category out of practical use for employers. The bill also prohibited placing an H-1B visa holder to work at a customer’s site, which became a chief objective of USCIS policy under Trump. The Durbin-Grassley bill attempted to force employers to pay H-1B visa holders much higher salaries than U.S. workers, similar to the Trump DOL wage rule.

After Trump’s election, the administration filled key immigration policy positions with people who had worked for Sessions, Grassley, anti-immigration organizations and others.

On April 18, 2017, when Trump issued the administration’s first public directive against H-1B visas, the “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, Trump immigration officials had written a document designed to give themselves the authority to argue any new restrictions later proposed came from the president. The Foreign Affairs Manual soon included a directive to consular officers to consider the executive order when deciding whether to grant a visa. Other restrictive measures also cited the order as a reason for new policies.

Behind the scenes, the Trump team took significant actions against employers and high-skilled foreign nationals even before the “Buy American and Hire American” executive order:

-        The “Implementation of March 31, 2017 Memo, Rescission of the December 22, 2000 ‘Guidance memo on H-1B computer-related-positions’” instructed USCIS adjudicators, in practice, to deny H-1B petitions for many occupations because the Department of Labor Occupational Outlook Handbook states that not everyone hired in those occupations required a bachelor’s degree. The document remained secret from the public until USCIS released it and others to the American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA) after settling a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit.

-         The USCIS document titled “H-1B RFE Standards,” dated “revised March 23, 2017,” contributed to a significant increase in expensive and time-consuming Requests for Evidence (RFEs).

-        “H-1B AC21 Denial Standards,” revised July 17, 2017, with March 23 crossed out, and other documents contained many redacted parts, masking what USCIS leadership instructed its adjudicators.

“What the documents do not say is more important than what they say,” Jonathan Wasden, a partner with Wasden Banias LLC, said in an interview when the USCIS material became public in September 2019. “You see that the noncontroversial matters are all supported by citation to statute and regulation. However, their most controversial policies lack any such support. It appears that the agency made dramatic changes to H-1B policy without grounding those changes in any law. Attorneys have known this is happening in practice, but to see they don’t even attempt to create a facade of statutory support is shocking.”

In October 2017, the new USCIS director, L. Francis Cissna, issued a memo that increased the denials of H-1B petitions for continuing employment, which are usually extensions for existing employees at the same company or an H-1B visa holder changing to a new employer. Cissna’s memo directed USCIS adjudicators to no longer give deference to prior agency determinations on applications, which meant adjudicating extensions of existing H-1B visa holders almost from scratch and under new, more restrictive standards.

Company executives and H-1B visa holders grew distraught as lives were upended when long-standing employees, often waiting years for their employment-based green cards, were denied H-1B petitions and forced to leave the country.

Cissna was an employee of the State Department and Department of Homeland Security who had been working on detail to Sen. Grassley on the Senate Judiciary Committee before joining the administration and being confirmed as USCIS director. He resigned in May 2019, reportedly due to an unwillingness to move as aggressively as other administration officials wanted on issues like asylum.

The impact of the many policy changes could be seen in September 2017. In that month, the percentage of completed H-1B cases with a Request for Evidence more than doubled from 17% in August to 38% in September 2017. By December 2017, the Request for Evidence rate increased to 56%. The following year, in November 2018, over 66% of H-1B petitions were at least temporarily rejected with a demand for additional evidence—nearly triple the rate of approximately 23% in November 2014.

Denials also increased. The percentage of H-1B petitions for initial employment (cases that typically count against the annual cap) increased to 24% in FY 2018 (which started October 1, 2017) and 21% in FY 2019. Between FY 2010 and FY 2015, the denial rates for H-1B petitions for initial employment were between 5% to 8%, much lower than during the Trump administration. While administration officials would claim they were attacking fraud, there is no evidence the policies reduced fraud and were clearly aimed at preventing approvals and the practical use of H-1B visas by employers. The policies were also the opposite of the deregulation that administration officials highlighted in other policy areas.

USCIS adjudicators also began approving some petitions for much less than the typical three years. In a classic example, USCIS granted one applicant an H-1B approval valid for only a single day – from February 1 to February 2, 2019. (See here.) USCIS published a February 2018 USCIS memo that changed the interpretation of an agency “itinerary” regulation. It resulted in approving cases for short periods unless an employer could provide contracts that detailed every place an individual might work.

Attorneys noticed the impact on their clients. Dagmar Butte of Parker, Butte & Lane said in an interview she experienced some bad adjudications during the Obama administration but considered those aberrations. “When I read the computer programmer memo and realized the aberration was now policy, contrary to any sane reading of statute or regulation, I was profoundly dispirited,” she said. “As a lawyer, I am trained to argue the law—-win or lose— and realizing the law didn’t matter when there was a policy objective to pursue was a terrible feeling.”

With attorneys scrambling, employers perplexed and H-1B visa holders panicking, Trump officials could smile.

The Trump team could feel confident their approach would succeed through four or eight years of the Trump presidency. First, employment-based immigration had little history of litigation. Employers mostly adopted a grin and bear it attitude. Second, going to court took time and every day the policies remained the Trump team was winning. The victory in the Muslim travel ban case also may have convinced at least some Trump officials that federal judges would back them.

However, this was not a chess match with only one side allowed to make moves. Fed-up employers started filing lawsuits. The most significant group of employers proved to be the ITServe Alliance. This group of companies, many founded by Indian-born immigrants, held onto an old-fashioned American ideal—every citizen has the right to seek redress for perceived repressive or unlawful acts committed by government officials.

The stage was set for a showdown at a court hearing in ITServe Alliance v. USCIS on May 9, 2019. After reading the briefs and listening to arguments on both sides about H-1B visa holders, U.S. District Judge Rosemary M. Collyer turned to the Trump administration’s attorney and said, “You don’t want these people in this country.”

Judge Collyer pointed to the significant “difference in outcome” for employers filing H-1B petitions during the Trump administration compared to previous years. Plaintiff’s attorneys Jonathan Wasden and Bradley Banias pointed to data showing USCIS approved 94% of H-1B petitions for client ERP Analysts from FY 2012 to FY 2017, but only 19% in FY 2018 and FY 2019.

Plaintiffs argued the February 2018 memo that a contractor must have actual and exclusive “control” over the day-to-day activities of a contractor’s employees at a third-party customer site was unlawful, as were other administration policies.

Judge Collyer appeared amused by the example of the H-1B petition that USCIS approved for only one day. She was less amused by the administration’s argument in its court filing that a USCIS policy memo “only guides adjudicators in exercising their discretion” and does not require notice and comment as would a regulation. The judge asked the government attorney about one of the USCIS memos that contributed to the significant increase in H-1B denials. “If it’s not changing things, why are the results so different?” she asked. The government’s answer: “That’s a fair question.”

While attorneys and employers waited for the judge’s decision, the administration continued to deny H-1B petitions, and new lawsuits moved forward. On March 31, 2020, in Taylor Made Software v. Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, U.S. District Judge Rudolph Contreras found USCIS was wrong to declare that since “many computer systems analysts have liberal arts degrees and gained experience elsewhere . . . the proffered position cannot be” a specialty occupation. Contreras cited the March 6, 2020, decision in 3Q Digital, Inc. v. USCIS: “[The regulation] does not say that a degree must always be required, yet the agency appears to have substituted the word ‘always’ for the word ‘normally.’ This is a misinterpretation and misapplication of the law.”

In India House v. Kevin McAleenan (March 26, 2020), U.S. District Judge Mary S. McElroy ruled that the USCIS Administrative Appeals Office (AAO) decision to uphold a denial of an H-1B petition for a restaurant manager with a B.S. in Hospitality Management was “arbitrary and capricious.” In one instance, a court ruling favored USCIS on the definition of a specialty occupation. That worked against the Trump administration when, on December 16, 2020, a higher court in the Ninth Circuit “reversed the district court’s grant of summary judgment for the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, and remanded, concluding that USCIS’s denial of an H-1B temporary worker visa was arbitrary and capricious.”

On June 20, 2020, Trump used his authority under section 212(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act to issue a proclamation suspending the entry of H-1B, L-1 and other temporary visa holders. This followed a similar proclamation on April 20, 2020, that stopped the entry of nearly all categories of immigrants, including employment-based.

Successful litigation in NAM v. DHS stopped the June 2020 action for many employers. (National Foundation for American Policy research on the low unemployment in computer occupations was cited in the judge’s opinion.)

On October 8, 2020, the Trump administration attempted to solidify its anti-H-1B legacy by issuing two sweeping regulations. This was significant because the administration had relied primarily on memos, making the policies more vulnerable to legal challenges. It remains unclear why the Trump administration did not pursue regulations earlier.

The Department of Labor issued a rule designed to make it much more expensive to employ an H-1B visa holder. On the same day, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) released a regulation to limit H-1B visas by introducing restrictive definitions of a specialty occupation and an employer-employee relationship, and limiting H-1B approvals to one year for work at customer locations. The DHS rule was a “greatest hits” of policies judges had previously declared to be illegal.

Both regulations were issued as “interim final.” That meant the rules sought to bypass the normal process. The administration claimed a “good cause” exception to public notice and comment, due primarily to the unemployment impact of the coronavirus pandemic. The Trump administration did not have the facts on its side. The unemployment rate was low in computer occupations, and precedent decisions did not support the administration’s claims of a mandate for emergency action. The only emergency appeared to be Donald Trump trailed Joe Biden in the polls and Trump appointees would no longer be in a position to make policy.

On December 1, 2020, an opinion striking down both rules dealt a significant blow to the Trump administration’s efforts to restrict high-skilled immigration. The plaintiffs—businesses and universities led by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce—argued economic data, the administration’s long delay in publishing the rules and other factors showed “good cause” did not exist for Trump officials to bypass standard rulemaking procedures. In an order, U.S. District Judge Jeffrey S. White agreed with the plaintiffs.

During the November 23rd hearing, held a week before Judge White’s opinion, attorney Paul Hughes, speaking for the plaintiffs, said of the regulations: “We think this is an overt attempt to destroy the H-1B program.” Company executives and university personnel said in declarations the DHS rule would cause scientists, software engineers, medical specialists and others to leave America. Attorneys and companies said international students would be unlikely to qualify under the DHS rule.

On January 14, 2021, the administration tried to salvage the DOL regulation by publishing a final rule. The rule was only slightly modified from the original and still aimed to price H-1B visa holders and employment-based immigrants out of the U.S. labor market. (See here.) In all, three courts had blocked the original rule.

The Biden administration reopened the DOL wage rule for comments and its fate remains uncertain. Litigation is expected if the rule goes into effect.

A Trump final rule published in January 2021 aimed to disadvantage international students when selecting H-1B petitions by eliminating the H-1B lottery and replacing it with wage-based selection criteria (highest to lowest salary). A Biden move to review regulations means the April 2021 H-1B lottery will likely occur without the change but litigation is still expected. In January 2021, the Biden administration revoked Trump’s Buy American and Hire American executive order.

In a surprising series of moves, the Trump administration tried to resurrect part of the DHS rule but failed to get it published in the Federal Register before Inauguration Day on January 20, 2021, effectively killing the rule. The administration had released text of a revised rule online that focused on harming the operations of IT services companies, hospitals, health care staffing companies and professional services firms that employ H-1B visa holders.

The fatal blow to the core of the Trump administration’s restrictive H-1B visa policies came in an opinion issued on March 10, 2020. Judge Rosemary M. Collyer invalidated the key USCIS memos and policies that caused H-1B denial rates to skyrocket, particularly for IT services companies. “A decision like this has been long overdue. We finally have the judicial system agreeing with the employers that USCIS has been out of bounds for a long time,” said ITServe Alliance National President Amar Varada. (See here for an analysis of the decision.)

In May 2020, USCIS agreed to a settlement with the ITServe Alliance that overturned years of restrictive policies. The settlement followed the March 10, 2020, District Court opinion and on the same day that a May 20, 2020, an opinion in Georgia also found USCIS policies to be unlawful.

Data on H-1B denial rates in the fourth quarter of FY 2020 showed the significant impact of the settlement and court rulings. The fourth quarter of FY 2020 began on July 1, 2020. That was shortly after June 17, 2020, when, as part of the settlement with the ITServe Alliance, USCIS issued a new policy memo, withdrew a February 2018 memo on contracts and itineraries, and rescinded the 2010 “Neufeld” memo, which the Trump administration interpreted to deny many H-1B petitions for work at customer locations.

“Losses in federal court cases that declared administration actions to be unlawful forced Trump officials to change restrictive immigration policies and resulted in dramatic improvements in H-1B denial rates for companies,” according to an analysis by the National Foundation for American Policy (NFAP). “The denial rate for new H-1B petitions for initial employment was 1.5% in the fourth quarter of FY 2020, much lower than the denial rate of 21% through the first three quarters of FY 2020.”

Individual company data show the significant impact of requiring the Trump administration to change its policies. “Ten of the top 25 employers of new H-1B visa holders had denial rates that ranged from 23% to 58% during the first three quarters of FY 2020, but their denial rates for H-1B petitions for initial employment dropped to between 1% to 4% in the fourth quarter of FY 2020,” according to the NFAP analysis.

The drop in the denial rates in the fourth quarter of FY 2020 showed that unlawful policies caused the increase in H-1B denials during the Trump administration. Vic Goel, managing partner of Goel & Anderson, said, “Following the decision and settlement in the ITServe Alliance case that caused the rescission of the 2010 and 2018 memos, H-1B approval rates improved substantially.”

On H-1B visas, the Trump administration came into office like a lion and exited like a lamb. The administration’s policies inflicted much damage over the past four years, say companies and attorneys. While Donald Trump often said he wanted “merit-based” immigration, the war waged against companies, international students and H-1B visa holders during his administration showed the president and his appointed team had little interest in admitting even the most highly skilled foreign nationals to America.

Follow me on Twitter. Check out my website.